---
layout: default
title:  Geospatial Processing On AWS Lambda
date:   2020-04-06 22:47:53 -0500
permalink: /posts/geo-lambda-1
---

Almost two months ago I got interested in the fact that AWS was now offering container image support on Lambda (see: [Post](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/new-for-aws-lambda-container-image-support/)). This is huge because until now (well, Dec. 2020) Lambda had been bound to an Amazon Linux AMI + layers, which I've never quite felt comfortable with.

At the same time, I also found out about a nifty, (maybe) little known feature of `gdal` called [virtual file handlers](https://gdal.org/user/virtual_file_systems.html). These `gdal` handlers allow a user to pipe results of geospatial operations just like you might use `cat` or `jq`. In theory, this could mean streamlining a good bit of geospatial utility pipelines.

A neat use case for these VSI handlers moght be to use `vsicurl` to get a file from the web, pipe the result through `ogr2ogr` and stream the content directly into a database without saving intermediate files. The goal for the weekend was to test out building some custom images, deploy them to lambda, and then throw together a token pipeline on top of this. I may return to this, might be dead &mdash; code [here](https://github.com/DMW2151/fictional-memory).

I ended up learning a lot more about building lambda layers, tools like `ldd`, `strip` and getting a nice intro to how to work with shared libs.

## Reconsidering Images, Hello Layers!

I abandoned the idea of using a container image. Maybe for another project, but within a few hours of getting started, I realized the process of building images, updating ECS, and updating the lambda container link just wasn't an enjoyable workflow. 

Nevermind that a `gdal` on `ubuntu` image was coming in over 1GB for what should be a few tiny utilities. Perhaps now was my moment to try layers on Amazon linux instead?

```bash
# Ooof!
REPOSITORY                           TAG        IMAGE ID       CREATED         SIZE
osgeo/gdal                           latest     dd8ab0045a5e   15 hours ago    1.48GB
```

In Lambda, layers are just `.zip` files that can contain additional code or data. In my case, I wanted to build a layer for the PostgreSQL client, `psql`, `gdal`, and some of the python dependencies my function may need. when building layers with Python or JS, it's a matter of zipping the contents of a pip target directory or `node-modules`. It's a bit different working with executables. When creating layers from executables, the **underlying shared libraries** need to be copied into the layer. of course, this is something I knew nothing about.

Luckily, I quickly found `ldd`, excellent.

```bash
$ man ldd
AME
       ldd - print shared object dependencies

DESCRIPTION
    ldd prints the shared objects (shared libraries) required by each program or shared object specified on the command line.  An example of its use and output is the following:

        $ ldd /bin/ls
        linux-vdso.so.1 (0x00007ffcc3563000)
        libselinux.so.1 => /lib64/libselinux.so.1 (0x00007f87e5459000)
        ...
        libattr.so.1 => /lib64/libattr.so.1 (0x00007f87e4817000)
        libpthread.so.0 => /lib64/libpthread.so.0 (0x00007f87e45fa000)
```

With that in mind, If I could just get an AWS Amazon Linux Image to **have** the correct binary, I could find and export the libs to make a layer. In the example below, I'm just copying the `wget` binary and it's shared libs to `utils` where I zip it up as a layer suitable for lambda.

```bash
# Find the shared libs, copy everything to /utils/lib
ldd /usr/bin/wget |\
    grep "=> /" |\
    awk '{print $3}' |\
    xargs -I '{}' cp -v '{}' /utils/lib

# strip any parent directory information from the libs
strip /utils/lib/* || true

# move the /bin/wget (the actual binary) into the layer as will
mkdir -p /utils/bin/ &&\
    cp /usr/bin/wget /utils/bin/

# zip the result!
cd /utils/ &&\
    zip --symlinks -ruq lambda-deploy.zip ./
```

Building the PPython layer was a bit easier, I was able to just install the libs with a target directory and zip that up without any sort of additional introspection...

```bash
python3 -m pip install -r req.txt --target /pyutils_stg/bin/ --upgrade &&\
    mkdir -p /pyutils_stg/bin &&\
    cd /pyutils_stg &&\
    zip /pyutils/aws-python-layer.zip -r ./
```

I then built those layers locally by creating Amazon linux Docker images with the utils, running `ldd`, and exporting the zip folder to the Docker host. I then tested the layers (and my actual code as an afterthought) by using the official Python 3.8 Lambda layer `public.ecr.aws/lambda/python:3.8`, copying in my layer zip archives, unzipping them, and ensuring that the utilities ran as expected.

Layer building dominated this project and I was quite glad to see under 40MB of layer archives at the end of this. The actual code took a huge backseat here, but it was very worth it.

```bash
 15M April 18 20:39 aws-python-layer.zip # Python Deps e.g. boto3
3.2M April 18 20:39 lambda-deploy.zip # Misc. CLI tools not found by default in `lambda/python:3.8` ()
 14M April 18 20:39 lambda-gdal.zip # OGR2OR + GDAL
5.4M April 18 20:39 lambda-psql.zip # Contains PSQL Client
```

## Things I Read

- [Stack Overflow Post on VSI Handlers](https://gis.stackexchange.com/questions/122082/piping-data-to-ogr2ogr)
- [CentOS GDAL, ogr2ogr, proj Install Guide](9https://gist.github.com/abelcallejo/e75eb93d73db6f163b076d0232fc7d7e) &mdash; even though I caved and used `remotepixel/amazonlinux-gdal` as an image instead
- [Docker Container remotepixel/amazonlinux-gdal](https://hub.docker.com/r/remotepixel/amazonlinux-gdal)
- [DevelopmentSeed GeoLambda - Good Reference on Building Layers](https://github.com/developmentseed/geolambda/blob/master/bin/package.sh)
